---
layout: post
title:  "Notes (discord pins)"
date:   2018-11-23 21:00:00 -0500
categories: jekyll update
---

# Bowser frame hops (or4ng33xp0)

It takes 32 frames for Bowser to jump and fall back to the floor, where he spends another 16 frames before hopping again. After 5 hops, you just need the Timer3 value to not be 0 so that he'll do another "wait 16 frames, then hop".

5 frames for Bowser to fall to the floor after the random Timer3 value is chosen

\+ (16 frames on the ground + 32 frames in the air) * 5

245 (0xF5)

So you either need 0xF5 and above or 0xF6 and above...not sure which side of the "off-by-one" error we're on :P

That's 11 or 12 good values out of 128 (because the random value is set to between 128 and 256), so 8.6% or 9.4%

...

6 hops = 11/128 = 8.6%  
5 hops = 48/128 = 37.5%  
4 hops = 48/128 = 37.5%  
3 hops = 21/128 = 16.4%  

# Lui practice rom (Lui) [download](https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/121413022731337732/502671645924655124/smb3practice.nes)

not much new, but i've replaced the anchor with something that looks like a poison shroom that makes you small mario on the map, also added some meme easter egg which may or may not be useful, see if you can figure it out

# Powerup grab/damage frame #s (Tompa) [src](https://pastebin.com/sySbjFAd)

Mario -> Super = 47 frames  
Super -> Mario = 47 frames  
Super -> Leaf  = 23 frames  
Leaf  -> Super = 23 frames  
Super -> Fire  = 30 frames  
Fire  -> Super = 23 frames  

# Bowser routine logic (or4ng33xp0)

Mario spawns Bowser like other enemies, due to scrolling within some range. When Bowser spawns, he is
in his "Wait for player" mode, waiting until the screen has scrolled all the way to the middle of the
room and for the player to land on the ground before being set to "Do movements" mode. One of his
timer values (Timer3) is set to 48 on this frame. Timer3 is decremented every frame.

Bowser has 4 internal states while in his "Do movements" mode:

0 - "Fall to floor"  
1 - "Jump and land on floor"  
2 - "Align and fall"  
3 - "Bust floor and look around."  

#### State 3 - Bust Floor and Look Around

He starts off in the "Bust floor and look around" state while falling for the first time. He stays in
this state for the 48 frames that the Timer3 value is set. When Timer3 hits 0, it is set to a
random byte that is grabbed from index 4 of the random array (memory address 0x0786), and Bowser's
state is changed to "Fall to floor". The top bit Timer3 is manually set, so the value will always be forced to
between 128 and 255. In the current Any% NoWW (Warps) TAS, this random value is 248.

#### State 0 - Fall To Floor

In "Fall to floor", Bowser will hop up and down, waiting 16 frames each time he hits the ground to
hop again. He'll also breath fireballs based on another random value that determines how many frames
between each fireball (between 96 and 159).

When Timer3 again hits 0, the game will wait until Bowser has hit the ground (if he was in the
middle of a hop) before setting a "Jump Delay" timer to 176. This timer is decremented every frame,
and when it hits 128 (after 48 frames), Bowser's internal state will be set to 1 ("Jump and land on floor"),
at which point he'll immediately do his big jump.

Knowing this, you can calculate how many frames Bowser will hang around before his first big jump based on which frame you scroll the screen to the middle and cause him to go into "Do movements" mode. But it sounds like you've already speed-hacked to find experimentally when the next frame is that gives you a long enough window before the first big jump to kill him before that happens.

In the TAS, the first fireball is shot when Timer3 is at 13 when Bowser is still in the
"Bust floor and look around" state, and the last fireball (the "kill shot") can be shot 2 frames
after the Timer3 value hit 0 while in the "Fall to floor" state. This makes up a total of about 263
frames required before Bowser's big jump. Depending upon where Bowser is in his hops, it appears the
maximum value that Timer3 would need to be set to in order to still kill him before his first jump
is 202 (hex 0xCA). This was calculated by taking 263 - 13 frames in "Bust floor" state - 48 frames
of "Jump Delay" = 202.

I did some manual memory editing on the TAS, and a value of 198 (0xC6) was still good enough, due
to Bowser being in the air from a little hop when Timer3 hit 0.

# Boss pattern (TheHaxor)

I made a video explaining how boss patterns are determined in general and a couple videos for the common W4 and W5 fire kills in warpless since I've had some people asking me about it recently and there doesn't seem to be a great resource that exists to my knowledge. I pretty much had to learn how to do them from other people's VODs.

Boss pattern introduction: <https://www.twitch.tv/videos/313176738>  
Common World 4 warpless fire kills: <https://www.twitch.tv/videos/313176739>  
Common World 5 warpless fire kills: <https://www.twitch.tv/videos/313176740>  

# Early hammer (or4ng33xp0)

I've been working a bit on cleaning up my Early Hammer pastebin and adding some images and animations. It's definitely not done yet and could use some better images and gifs, but I figured it's probably at least a little more helpful than a wall of text.

[smb3.bf0.org](http://smb3.bf0.org/)

# SMB3 rom assorted patches (narfman0)

[github narfman0/romhacks](https://github.com/narfman0/romhacks)

# Notes on pspeed (Tompa)

Here are some notes on the P-meter: [pastebin](https://pastebin.com/TdUqKgcx)

If your speed is over 40 and you land, while you have P-speed activated, you'll always be able to keep it. Less than 40 speed, then you'll only keep it if you jump on the earliest frame, or have previously hit a wall, and a few other exceptions

# Lemmy fire kill (Horsedad / ilm)

On a unrelated note, ILM showed me this really cool Lemmy firekill today that lets you avoid having to rely on bouncing off his back. It's slightly slower, but far, far more consistent. To be clear, this is all ILM's creation. <https://www.twitch.tv/videos/281359865>

# Warpless learning resources (Lawso) [src](https://pastebin.com/faZyLxux)

Warpless Route by CujoIHSV: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Sq8C-vA00iixrmWg2_iohQxmnGCAlI2_Na7fGt-5SQA/edit
 
Goes over basic theory, when and where to fight hammer bros and use items, etc.
 
Warpless Tutorial by WhenChukAttacks: https://www.twitch.tv/whenchukattacks/v/42569050
 
Talks about basic movement in general as well as strats for levels, good source if you've gotten a little start with SMB3 or even if you're still brand new.
 
Warpless Tutorial by Lawso42:
 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Drx0XP8_6Iw&list=PLoQOkofU65dMYGFeo98fhFkexT72ByTfH&index=1
 
Another good tutorial, split up by worlds. Shows individual levels then breaks them down for visual cues, etc.
 
Warpless Strategy by Aweglib(me :P):
 
Part 1 Worlds 1-3: http://www.twitch.tv/aweglib/v/34984893
 
Part 2 Worlds 4-6: http://www.twitch.tv/aweglib/v/36519785
 
Part 3 Worlds 7-8: http://www.twitch.tv/aweglib/v/36520960
 
I wanted to make more of a big picture kind of guide, geared more towards players who have already learned strats, but might be still struggling with remembering how to deal with RNG or mistakes during a run. How to do levels quickly is shown as just part of the overall discussion, but this is focused more on handling the route instead of individual level strats.
 
SMB3 Warpless Seminar by mitchflowerpower: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL3gkkS4FY_-EwqsWUnhcjMLPXWBCqvIzg
 
Mitch is currently working on putting together and in-depth talk of different strats for each stage. Still in progress, but the work done so far is incredible, definitely worth checking out regardless of your skill level.
 
SMB3 Practice Rom: https://www.dropbox.com/s/yqgl5k0qi9si5en/Super%20Mario%203%20Practice%20ROM.nes?dl=0
 
A rom made by FredCoughlin to assist with learning the game via emulator or flash cart, it includes free movement on the overworld, a full inventory, world and lives select on the title screen, as well as some extra paths to make traversing the world map a bit easier (especially in w8).
 
http://www.dotsarecool.com/twitch/smb3pspeed.html
 
Recently, Dots has added a few features to Fred's original ROM, including P-meter updates to help manage P-speed, the ability to Start+Select to exit levels, and more paths in World 9 (Warp Zone) to allow movement between worlds easier.
 
Game Genie Codes for Console: KKKZSPIU
                              YPXXLVGE
                              AEUGNSSL
 
As far as I know these are the 3 best Game Genie codes to use if you want to practice on console. I don't know exactly which code is which, but it gives you access to a world select and life counter on the opening screen, (Up/Down to change world on the left, A to add on 5 more lives) gives you a full inventory with the ability to reuse items, as well as letting you re-enter normal stages. Forts, airships, and odd levels like the pyramid are unable to be re-enter after completion, so you'll have to suicide in the level or reset to get back into them.
 
SMB3 RTA Wiki: http://smb3rta.wikia.com/wiki/SMB3RTA_Wiki
 
Slightly outdated, but still has some decent information. I might look into getting this more up-to-date as the days go on.
 
 
If you have more to add to this please feel free to contact me, I'll try to keep this up-to-date as the tourney nears.

# Hammer bro movement direction item (Tompa) [src](https://pastebin.com/7gZRRiZx)

After a Hammer Brother has moved, it will always face a specific direction. This way you can tell which HB that has which item.
 
HB1: Facing Right  
HB2: Facing Left  
HB3: Facing Right  
 
World 1: HB1 = Star  
World 2: HB1 = Music Box    HB2 = Hammer    HB3 = Flute  
World 3: HB1 = Star         HB2 = Hammer  
World 4: HB1 = P-Wing       HB2 = Star      HB3 = Cloud  
World 5: HB1 = Star         HB2 = Music Box HB3 = P-Wing  
World 6: HB1 = Hammer       HB2 = Cloud     HB3 = Star  

# 6-10 P-Speed Fire Grabs from Big Mario (2 methods) (Kirua) [src](https://www.twitch.tv/videos/105484752)

# Boom Boom hammer glitch (mitchflowerpower)

Glitchy boom boom kill [youtube](https://youtu.be/Z_dhOjulIgs)

# SMB3 bingo (mitchflowerpower)

this should be the most updated ver of bingo with the cards link [Super_Mario_Bros._3_USA_Rev_9.nes](https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/121413022731337732/396115380076281859/Super_Mario_Bros._3_USA_Rev_9.nes)

Instructions: https://bingobaker.com/view/1451346

Click the play online to have your card, window capture in OBS or whatever it is that you use

Refresh and or edit link will change the card to setup for a new one.

# Version differences (Kirua) [src](https://www.speedrun.com/smb3/thread/7pslq)

People request from time to time that the All-Stars version gets its own leaderboard, so I'm making this thread to try and clarify what the main differences are between the various versions of SMB3, how the versions rank in terms of speed, and why we've decided in the past to keep all of them in a unified leaderboard.

~ Version Differences ~

NES (NTSC US)\
+ fastest loading time for stages\
+ Mario loses only one powerup increment per hit\
- slower castles than japanese versions (text speed)

NES (PAL)\
+ Mario loses only one powerup increment per hit\
- game runs at 50 hz instead of 60 hz (so the game speed is only 5/6 of the NTSC speed)\
- shorter jumps than NTSC, making many strats impossible

FC (NTSC J)\
+ fastest castles (gains several seconds per castle compared to US versions) due to text speed\
- Mario goes small mario when hit, regardless of powerup (makes a few strats impossible)\
- extra fade-in at the start of every "stage" (includes overworld pipes among other things) wastes around 1s each time\
- extra wall & pipe at the end of 5-1, wastes a few seconds

SNES (All-Stars US)\
+ lagless, which works in your favor most of the time but can potentially hinder a couple of despawning strats\
+ can use fireballs with two different buttons: allows faster mashing, and using fireballs without releasing B (run)\
+ Mario loses only one powerup increment per hit\
+ 4-4 is easier & slightly faster (small detail)\
- extra "Mario Start!" screen at the start of every stage, wastes around 86 frames each time\
- doors are slightly slower\
- slower fall after grabbing the wand\
- can't fireball while offscreen, hinders a few strats

SFC (All-Stars J)\
+ lagless, which works in your favor most of the time but can potentially hinder a couple of despawning strats\
+ semi fast castles (combination of faster text & slower fall)\
+ Mario loses only one powerup increment per hit\
+ can use fireballs with two different buttons: allows faster mashing, and using fireballs without releasing B (run)\
+ 4-4 is easier & slightly faster (small detail)\
- extra "Mario Start!" screen at the start of every stage, wastes around 86 frames each time\
- doors are slightly slower\
- can't fireball while offscreen, hinders a few strats

Extra: Wii VC\
- slightly slower framerate than the NES, wastes around 20s for a hundo run

Note that this isn't meant to be an exhaustive list of the differences. For example, Mario appears in the overworld 1s faster in All-Stars at the start of the game compared to NES. Also, the 1-3 whistle Mushroom House is faster on J. The differences listed should be the biggest though.

~ Version Ranking ~

It's impossible to quantify exactly what the difference is between let's say NES & All-Stars. For example, you can't put a number on the "lagless" aspect of All-Stars.

That being said, the time gained/lost due to certain aspects is big enough that we can determine a ranking:

NES > FC > SFC > SNES >>>>>> PAL

The NES Wii VC version would be somewhere between NES & FC, closer to FC.

Also note that the FC version is the most difficult version due to being less forgiving for hits. In that regard, PAL's difficulty is hard to assess because PAL is the only version that requires its own set of strats for almost every stage.

~ Unified Leaderboard ~

-> So, if there's a clear time disparity between some of the versions, why not separate LBs?

The main idea behind the unified LB is that almost every strat is the same in every version (ignoring PAL), the routes are also pretty much identical, and all the physics/core mechanics are the same. Meaning that the time difference is mostly from loading times. Having an entirely separate category/LB just because of loading times seems really overkill to us. Using filters is usually more adequate for cases like this (like for LBs with multiple language versions).

-> But other Mario games do it!

Other 2D Mario games with separate LBs for All-Stars usually have major gameplay differences between the two. For example Super Mario Bros. 2 (USA) allows you to Save & Quit, which allows you to do a completely different route in any%. In SMB3, the gameplay & routes being almost identical, it's a different case (although obviously subjective to some degree).

But there's also other reasons. For example, if you're gonna have a separate LB for All-Stars, you then need to separate SNES & SFC. Because the time difference during castles is big enough that SFC is clearly better than SNES.

In that regard, PAL would obviously "deserve" a separate category way more than any other version, considering you need your own set of strats for it.

All in all it would end up looking like this: Any% Warpless (NES) / Any% Warpless (FC) / Any% Warpless (SFC) / Any% Warpless (SNES) / Any% Warpless (PAL)\
And now imagine that for every category.

Additionally, the bulk of the competition being on NES, we strongly feel that fragmenting the community and isolating a few runners is unneeded.

Lastly, as mentioned earlier, you can (and should) use filters if you want to see the competition/best times on a specific version. For example select Filter -> Platforms -> SNES if needed.

The unified leaderboard is not meant to be unfair or insulting to players using different versions. We're just trying to be coherent and efficient.

# All forts route guide (Cujo) [src](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1n16AFOPGwFfTmSnErjU1dRpM2M8KhprRqBztqyvjVek/edit#heading=h.qq45edsb0zox)

SMB3 Any% All Fortresses
Rules
Beat the game, completing every fortress in the game. Only the fortresses are required, not the castles/airships (other than Bowser’s Fort).

Time starts on pressing Start on the title screen.
Time ends on entering the door after defeating Bowser, which is exactly 5 frames before the screen begins to fade.

Notes
Any hammer bros not listed as kill or avoid are optional and are limited to stars and P-wings. You must collect at least 1 P-wing (for 6-5) and at least 1 star (for 7-2) from hammer bros at some point in Worlds 3-6. The last P-wing will help you get through 6-9 or 7-6 quickly, but this is technically optional. Even with the extra P-wing, you still have to choose between wall jumping 6-9 or zipping 7-6.

Note that the star HB in World 3 is optional since you don’t have to cross the bridge below 3-6.

Collecting the cloud in 3-7 allows you to skip any single level of your choice. 4-4 and 5-2 are the longest unskipped levels, and 3-9 is only 20 frames shorter than those, so skipping one of these 3 levels is recommended.

You get a music box at the end of W3. Use it any time you need to skip an extra HB.

Recommended Route  
World 1  
1-1  
1-2  
1-F (collect the whistle)  
1-3 (collect the whistle)  
Whistle to World 2  
World 2  
HBs to kill: hammer, whistle  
HBs to avoid: music box  
2-1  
2-2  
2-F  
2-3  
2-Q  
2-4 / 2-5  
2-P  
2-C  
World 3  
HBs to kill: hammer  
3-1  
3-2  
3-3  
3-F1  
3-4  
Cloud past 3-6  
3-7 (collect the cloud from the coin heaven)  
3-F2  
3-8  
3-9 (cloud?)  
3-C  
World 4  
HBs to kill: cloud  
4-1  
4-2  
4-3  
4-F1  
4-4 (cloud?)  
4-6  
4-F2  
Whistle to World 5  
World 5  
HBs to avoid: music box  
5-1  
5-2 (cloud?)  
5-F1  
5-T  
5-4  
5-5  
5-7  
5-F2  
5-8  
Cloud past 5-9  
5-C  
World 6  
HBs to kill: hammer, cloud  
Hammer past 6-1 / 6-2 / 6-3  
6-F1  
6-4  
6-5 (P-wing)  
Hammer past 6-7  
6-F2  
6-8  
6-9 (P-wing/wall jump) / 6-10  
6-F3  
6-C  
World 7  
7-1 (zip)  
7-2 (star)  
7-3  
Cloud past 7-4  
7-F1 (P-wing)  
7-6 (P-wing/zip)  
7-7 / 7-8  
Cloud past 7-9  
7-F2  
Whistle to World 8  
World 8  
Autoscrollers  
Hands  
Air force  
8-1  
8-2  
8-F  
Super tanks  
Bowser’s Fort  

# Dotsarecool practice rom (dotsarecool) [link](http://www.dotsarecool.com/twitch/smb3pspeed.html)

# Any% guide (Kirua) [link](https://www.twitch.tv/videos/172716898)

# Any% guide (Producks) [link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B6EA540L0EBwRFUzN1Y2VTc2SWM/view)
